On this page Nanobot AI Assistant Core Framework  Message Bus and Channel Integration  AI Agent Skills and Tools  Core Tool Registry and Abstractions  Built-in Agent Tools  Skill Definition and Management  Skill Creation and Anatomy  GitHub Interaction Skill  Summarization Skill  Tmux Session Management Skill  Weather Information Skill  Large Language Model (LLM) and Transcription Providers  Session and Workspace Management  Command-Line Interface (CLI)  This wiki was automatically generated  on Feb 7, 2026 based on commit 4617043. Gemini can make mistakes, so double-check it. # hkuds/nanobotsparkPowered by GeminiOn this page Nanobot AI Assistant Core Framework  Message Bus and Channel Integration  AI Agent Skills and Tools  Core Tool Registry and Abstractions  Built-in Agent Tools  Skill Definition and Management  Skill Creation and Anatomy  GitHub Interaction Skill  Summarization Skill  Tmux Session Management Skill  Weather Information Skill  Large Language Model (LLM) and Transcription Providers  Session and Workspace Management  Command-Line Interface (CLI)  This wiki was automatically generated  on Feb 7, 2026 based on commit 4617043. Gemini can make mistakes, so double-check it. zoom_inThe Nanobot AI Assistant is a personal AI system that enables agents to process messages, execute tasks, and communicate across various channels. It integrates core AI functionalities with external platforms and user workspaces.
The system's foundational components define the AI agent's core architecture, including its operational loop, context management, memory handling, and the orchestration of subagents. These components manage the agent's internal processes and execution flow. Configuration management uses Pydantic-based schemas to define, load, and persist application settings for channels, agents, LLM providers, and tools. Scheduled tasks are managed by a service that handles job definition, persistence, and execution logic, while a separate service provides periodic wake-up calls by checking a designated file in the workspace Heartbeat Service for Periodic Wake-ups.
Communication within the system and with external platforms occurs via an asynchronous message bus. This bus enables decoupled message exchange between internal components and various chat channels. A channel plugin architecture allows integration with different chat platforms, managing their lifecycle and routing messages Message Bus and Channel Integration.
The AI agent extends its capabilities through a system of skills and tools. Tools provide fundamental functionalities such as shell command execution, file system manipulation, and web interaction. Skills encapsulate specialized knowledge and workflows, defined by Markdown files and bundled resources like scripts or references AI Agent Skills and Tools.
An abstraction layer integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) and transcription services. This layer defines standard interfaces for interacting with LLM providers, such as those unified by LiteLLM, and for audio transcription, using services like Groq Large Language Model (LLM) and Transcription Providers.
Conversational sessions and the AI's operational workspace are managed through persistence mechanisms. Conversational history and metadata are stored and cached, ensuring continuity across interactions. The workspace defines the AI assistant's personality, operational guidelines, available tools, and long-term memory Session and Workspace Management.
A command-line interface (CLI) provides direct user interaction. It facilitates initial setup, orchestrates core AI services, enables direct communication with agents, and manages scheduled tasks and communication channels Command-Line Interface (CLI).
## Nanobot AI Assistant Core Frameworklinkzoom_inThe nanobot AI assistant is an ultra-lightweight, personal AI system designed for core agent functionality and extensibility. Its foundational components are located primarily within the (root) directory, encompassing the main application structure, configuration mechanisms, scheduled task management, periodic wake-up calls, and general utility functions.
The AI agent's core architecture, described in AI Agent Core Architecture, centers around the AgentLoop in nanobot/agent/loop.py. This loop processes incoming messages, constructs conversational context using a ContextBuilder in nanobot/agent/context.py, and interacts with a large language model (LLM) via an LLMProvider. The AgentLoop also manages the execution of various tools, which are registered with a ToolRegistry and enable functionalities like file system operations, shell command execution, and web interaction. Persistent memory for the agent is handled by the MemoryStore in nanobot/agent/memory.py, which manages daily notes and a long-term memory file (MEMORY.md). Skills, which extend the agent's capabilities, are loaded and managed by the SkillsLoader in nanobot/agent/skills.py, using Markdown files with metadata. For complex or background tasks, the SubagentManager in nanobot/agent/subagent.py facilitates the spawning and orchestration of lightweight subagents, reporting their results back to the main agent via the Asynchronous Message Bus.
Configuration management, as detailed in Configuration Management, uses Pydantic models to define application settings for channels, agents, LLM providers, and tools within nanobot/config. This system handles loading, saving, and migrating configurations from a config.json file, supporting environment variable overrides and ensuring type-safe settings.
Scheduled tasks are managed by the CronService in nanobot/cron/service.py, as discussed in Cron Service for Scheduled Tasks. This service allows for defining, persisting, and executing agent tasks based on various schedules (one-time, periodic, or cron expressions).
For periodic wake-up calls, the HeartbeatService in nanobot/heartbeat/service.py, explained in Heartbeat Service for Periodic Wake-ups, checks the workspace/HEARTBEAT.md file at regular intervals. If actionable content is found, it triggers a callback to the agent for processing.
General utility functions, outlined in Utility Functions, are located in nanobot/utils. These functions provide common helper functionalities such as directory management, path retrieval, date/time formatting, and string manipulation, supporting various aspects of the nanobot system.
The operational context for the AI assistant, including its personality, operational guidelines, and long-term memory, is defined within the workspace directory, as described in AI Assistant Operational Workspace Configuration and Long-Term Memory Storage and Recall. This workspace allows for flexible and personalized behavior of the agent.
### AI Agent Core ArchitecturelinkThe nanobot AI assistant is built around a core framework that manages its operational lifecycle, from processing incoming messages to executing tasks and maintaining a persistent memory. This framework allows the agent to function autonomously, interact with various external systems, and adapt its behavior based on past interactions and defined capabilities.
The central component of the AI agent is the AgentLoop, defined in nanobot/agent/loop.py. This loop orchestrates the agent's main execution flow, continuously processing InboundMessage objects received from the system's Asynchronous Message Bus. For each message, it constructs a comprehensive context, interacts with a Large Language Model (LLM), executes tools as directed by the LLM, and manages conversational history. The loop ensures that the agent can receive, process, and respond to various inputs, maintaining a continuous dialogue or task execution flow. The agent's interactions are supported by a ToolRegistry, which dynamically registers and manages the diverse tools available to the agent, such as ReadFileTool, ExecTool, and WebSearchTool.
Context construction is handled by the ContextBuilder class, found in nanobot/agent/context.py. This component is responsible for assembling all relevant information into a coherent prompt for the LLM. It integrates the agent's core identity, operational guidelines from bootstrap files (e.g., AGENTS.md, SOUL.md), and historical information from the agent's memory. The ContextBuilder also dynamically includes details about available AI Agent Skills and Tools, presenting them to the LLM in a structured format. This ensures that the LLM has all necessary information to generate appropriate responses or tool calls. For a detailed discussion on configuration files, refer to AI Assistant Operational Workspace Configuration.
The agent's memory system is managed by the MemoryStore, located in nanobot/agent/memory.py. This component handles the persistent storage and retrieval of the agent's knowledge, encompassing both daily notes and long-term memory. Daily notes are organized by date, allowing the agent to track recent activities and observations. A dedicated MEMORY.md file serves as a long-term knowledge base, which the agent can update and reference across sessions. This persistent memory is crucial for maintaining continuity in conversations and tasks, allowing the agent to recall past interactions and information. More details on persistent storage can be found in Long-Term Memory Storage and Recall.
The agent's capabilities are extended through a system of skills, managed by the SkillsLoader in nanobot/agent/skills.py. This component discovers, loads, and formats skills defined in Markdown files within the workspace. Skills provide the agent with specific functionalities and knowledge, which are dynamically presented to the LLM as part of the context. The SkillsLoader also handles checking skill requirements, ensuring that the agent only attempts to use capabilities for which it has the necessary tools or environment. The system allows for both built-in skills and custom skills defined by the user.
Subagents are managed by the SubagentManager, defined in nanobot/agent/subagent.py. This component facilitates the spawning and orchestration of background subagent instances. Subagents are designed to perform focused tasks asynchronously, operating with an isolated context and a specialized set of tools. They communicate their results or failures back to the main agent via the Asynchronous Message Bus, allowing for complex tasks to be broken down and executed in parallel or in the background.
### Configuration Managementlinkzoom_inApplication settings for channels, agents, Large Language Model (LLM) providers, and tools are managed through a Pydantic-based schema, which defines, loads, saves, and migrates these configurations. The nanobot/config directory encapsulates this functionality, ensuring type-safe and flexible handling of settings across the nanobot system.
The core of this system is the schema defined in nanobot/config/schema.py, which uses Pydantic models to structure configuration data. This includes settings for various communication channels such as WhatsApp, Telegram, Feishu, and Discord, aggregated under ChannelsConfig. For AI agents, AgentDefaults specifies behaviors like workspace paths, preferred LLM models, and iteration limits, which are then part of AgentsConfig. LLM provider configurations, including API keys and base URLs for services like Anthropic, OpenAI, and Groq, are managed by ProviderConfig and ProvidersConfig. Tool-specific settings, such as web search API keys and execution timeouts for shell commands, are defined within WebToolsConfig and ExecToolConfig, and are collectively organized under ToolsConfig. The root Config class integrates all these sub-configurations and supports loading from environment variables, prefixed with NANOBOT_, with __ as a delimiter for nested fields. It also contains logic to dynamically retrieve API keys and base URLs for LLM providers based on the requested model.
The process of loading, saving, and migrating configurations is handled by utilities in nanobot/config/loader.py. The load_config function retrieves settings from a designated JSON file, typically ~/.nanobot/config.json. It includes mechanisms to migrate older configuration formats to the current schema and converts JSON's camelCase keys to Python's snake_case for Pydantic validation. Conversely, save_config persists the current Config object back to the JSON file, transforming snake_case keys back to camelCase. This file also provides functions like get_config_path for determining the configuration file's location and _migrate_config for evolving the configuration schema without breaking existing setups. The nanobot/config/__init__.py module acts as a unified entry point, re-exporting the Config class and the primary loading utilities for convenient access throughout the application.
### Cron Service for Scheduled Taskslinkzoom_inThe CronService manages scheduled agent tasks, often referred to as cron jobs, enabling agents to perform actions at specified times or intervals. It handles the definition of these jobs, their persistence across service restarts, the logic for scheduling and executing them, and tracking their status.
Job definitions are managed through several data structures defined in nanobot/cron/types.py. A CronJob encapsulates all details of a scheduled task, including its unique identifier, name, and whether it is enabled. The CronSchedule component within a CronJob specifies the timing, supporting one-time executions at a specific millisecond timestamp, recurring executions every fixed interval (every_ms), or complex schedules defined by cron expressions. This allows for flexible scheduling, from simple reminders to elaborate periodic tasks. The CronPayload defines the action to be performed when the job runs, which can be a system event or an agent turn, potentially including a message to be delivered to a specific channel or recipient. The CronJobState tracks the runtime status of a job, including its next run time, last run time, and any errors encountered during execution.
The persistence mechanism for these jobs allows the system to retain all scheduled tasks even if the service restarts. CronService automatically loads existing job configurations from a designated JSON file during initialization and saves any changes, ensuring continuity.
The core scheduling logic within nanobot/cron/service.py is responsible for calculating the next execution time for each enabled job based on its CronSchedule. It uses an internal timer to efficiently wake up and check for jobs that are due. When a job's scheduled time arrives, the CronService executes it. The actual task execution is delegated via an on_job callback, which allows the cron service to remain agnostic to the specific actions performed by the agent. After execution, the CronService updates the job's state, including its last run time and status. For one-time jobs, it can be configured to automatically remove or disable them after a single execution. The service also provides an API for managing jobs, including adding, removing, enabling/disabling, listing, and manually triggering their execution.
For detailed information on how skills can utilize this cron service, see Cron Service for Scheduled Tasks.
### Heartbeat Service for Periodic Wake-upslinkzoom_inThe HeartbeatService provides a mechanism for regularly prompting an AI agent to perform tasks. This service periodically checks a designated file, workspace/HEARTBEAT.md, within the agent's workspace. If this file contains actionable content, the service issues a prompt to the agent and expects a response.
The service's operation centers around the HeartbeatService class, defined in nanobot/heartbeat/service.py. It can be configured with a specific interval for periodic checks and can be started, stopped, or triggered manually. When the service is active, it asynchronously monitors the HEARTBEAT.md file. The content of this file can include instructions or tasks for the agent. The service is designed to intelligently ignore non-actionable content in the file, such as headers or empty checkboxes, to avoid unnecessary prompts.
Upon detecting actionable content, the HeartbeatService invokes a callback function, passing a predefined prompt to the AI agent. The agent then processes this prompt, potentially performing actions based on the content of workspace/HEARTBEAT.md. The service interprets the agent's response to determine if tasks were completed or if no action was required, logging the outcome. This mechanism allows the AI assistant to autonomously review and address ongoing tasks or instructions at regular intervals, contributing to its continuous operation.
### Utility FunctionslinkCategoryPurposeExample FunctionsDirectory ManagementEnsure directories exist and manage their creation.ensure_dirPath RetrievalGet specific directory paths for nanobot's operation.get_data_path, get_workspace_path, get_sessions_path, get_memory_path, get_skills_pathDate/Time FormattingGenerate formatted date and time strings.today_date, timestampString ManipulationModify and process strings for various purposes.truncate_string, safe_filenameSession Key ParsingExtract components from session key strings.parse_session_key
General utility functions provide foundational support for the nanobot system, encompassing directory management, path retrieval, date/time formatting, string manipulation, and session key parsing. These functions are primarily located in the nanobot/utils directory, with core utilities exposed through nanobot/utils/__init__.py.
Path management utilities ensure consistent access to critical directories. For instance, a function ensures that a specified directory path exists by creating it and any necessary parent directories, which is fundamental for preventing errors during file operations. Other functions retrieve designated paths for the nanobot workspace, general data, session logs, memory, and skills, ensuring their existence and promoting organized data storage within the user's home directory.
Date and time utilities format the current date and time into standardized string formats, facilitating consistent timestamps across the system. String manipulation functions handle tasks such as truncating strings to a specified length with an optional suffix and sanitizing strings for use as safe filenames by replacing problematic characters. Additionally, a specific utility parses session key strings into their constituent channel and chat ID components, enabling structured identification of conversational contexts.
## Message Bus and Channel Integrationlinkzoom_inThe communication architecture of the nanobot system is built upon an asynchronous message bus that facilitates decoupled interactions between various internal components and external chat channels. This design promotes modularity and scalability by ensuring that different parts of the system can operate and communicate without direct dependencies.
The core of this architecture is the MessageBus class, defined in nanobot/bus/queue.py, which manages inbound messages from channels to the AI agent and outbound messages from the agent back to channels. The bus standardizes message structures using InboundMessage and OutboundMessage (defined in nanobot/bus/events.py), ensuring consistent data representation across the system. It handles the publishing and consumption of messages, allowing channels to subscribe to outgoing messages destined for them, and then dispatches these messages asynchronously.
Integration with different chat platforms is managed through a plugin architecture centered around the BaseChannel abstract interface, located in nanobot/channels/base.py. This interface mandates a common contract for all channel implementations, covering lifecycle management (starting and stopping), message reception, permission checking, and message transmission. The ChannelManager, implemented in nanobot/channels/manager.py, orchestrates this process by dynamically initializing channels based on system configuration, managing their collective startup and shutdown, and routing outbound messages from the message bus to the appropriate channel. This manager ensures that communication is consistently handled, including the enforcement of access control through the is_allowed method within each channel.
A concrete example of this channel integration is the WhatsApp Web bridge, located in bridge. This TypeScript-based implementation connects WhatsApp Web to the Python backend via WebSockets. The bridge manages authentication, message forwarding, and reconnection logic, abstracting the complexities of the WhatsApp Web protocol. It uses the Baileys library for WhatsApp interaction and communicates JSON-formatted messages over WebSockets to relay InboundMessage objects to the nanobot and receive OutboundMessage objects for transmission. See WhatsApp Web Bridge Implementation for more details.
### Asynchronous Message Buslinkzoom_inThe MessageBus facilitates decoupled communication within the nanobot system, serving as a central hub for messages exchanged between chat channels and AI agents. This asynchronous message passing mechanism, implemented in nanobot/bus/queue.py, ensures that components can interact without direct dependencies, enhancing modularity and scalability.
The bus utilizes two primary asynchronous queues: an inbound queue for messages originating from external chat channels and an outbound queue for responses from the AI agent intended for those channels. Messages are standardized into InboundMessage and OutboundMessage data structures, defined in nanobot/bus/events.py, which encapsulate details such as the channel, sender, chat ID, and content. The session_key property within InboundMessage is used to uniquely identify conversation sessions, crucial for tracking ongoing interactions.
Components can publish_inbound messages to the bus, and the AI agent can consume_inbound messages for processing. Conversely, the agent can publish_outbound messages, which are then managed by the dispatch_outbound process. This dispatcher runs as a continuous background task, monitoring the outbound queue and invoking registered callback functions for the target channel. Channels, in turn, can subscribe_outbound to receive messages specifically addressed to them. This design allows for flexible routing and delivery of messages across the nanobot's various integrated communication platforms. For further details on how channels integrate with this system, refer to the Channel Plugin Architecture section.
### Channel Plugin Architecturelinkzoom_inThe nanobot system utilizes a plugin architecture for integrating various chat platforms, providing a consistent way to handle communication with external services. This architecture is built around an abstract interface, a manager for channel lifecycle, and shared logic for message routing and permission checks.
The BaseChannel in nanobot/channels/base.py defines the fundamental contract for all channel implementations. It ensures that any new chat platform integration adheres to a common set of operations, including methods to start and stop the connection, and to send messages. Each channel also implements a mechanism to check sender permissions using the is_allowed method, which consults the channel's configuration to determine if an incoming message's sender is authorized. Incoming messages, after passing permission checks, are processed and then published as InboundMessage objects to the system's Asynchronous Message Bus, decoupling the channel's specific integration from the core AI logic.
The ChannelManager in nanobot/channels/manager.py orchestrates the entire channel ecosystem. It is responsible for dynamically initializing channels based on the system's configuration. When the nanobot system starts, the ChannelManager identifies which channels are enabled and instantiates the appropriate channel classes, such as TelegramChannel or DiscordChannel. It then manages the collective startup and shutdown of all these channels. A key function of the ChannelManager is its _dispatch_outbound task, which continuously monitors the Asynchronous Message Bus for OutboundMessage events. When an OutboundMessage is detected, the manager routes it to the correct channel's send method, ensuring that responses and notifications are delivered to their intended external chat platforms. This design promotes modularity, allowing new communication platforms to be integrated without modifying the core system.
### WhatsApp Web Bridge Implementationlinkzoom_inThe nanobot system integrates with WhatsApp Web through a TypeScript-based bridge, located in the bridge directory, which facilitates communication between the Python backend and WhatsApp. This bridge utilizes WebSockets for real-time message relay and command execution, managing authentication, message processing, and reconnection logic.
The BridgeServer, defined in bridge/src/server.ts, orchestrates this communication. It operates a WebSocket server that allows the Python backend to send commands and receive WhatsApp events. Incoming messages from Python clients are parsed to execute commands, such as sending messages to WhatsApp. Conversely, WhatsApp events, including incoming messages, QR codes for authentication, and status updates, are broadcast to all connected Python clients. This server is initialized and configured in bridge/src/index.ts, which also handles graceful shutdowns and environment-based configuration for the port and authentication directory.
Interaction with WhatsApp Web is handled by the WhatsAppClient, implemented in bridge/src/whatsapp.ts. This client wraps the Baileys library, which provides the underlying functionality for connecting to WhatsApp, managing authentication credentials, and handling message events. It includes mechanisms for persisting authentication state across sessions, automatically attempting to reconnect after disconnections (unless explicitly logged out), and generating QR codes for initial authentication. Incoming messages are processed, their content extracted, and then passed to a callback for further handling by the Python backend. The WhatsAppClient also provides functionality for sending outbound messages to specified recipients.
The design of the bridge emphasizes a decoupled architecture, with the BridgeServer handling WebSocket communication and the WhatsAppClient managing WhatsApp-specific logic. Communication across the WebSocket is standardized using JSON, enabling interoperability between the TypeScript bridge and the Python nanobot backend.
## AI Agent Skills and Toolslinkzoom_inThe Nanobot AI assistant extends its capabilities through a system of skills and tools, enabling it to perform diverse tasks, from executing shell commands to interacting with web services and managing scheduled tasks. This architecture provides a structured way to integrate new functionalities and orchestrate complex workflows.
Built-in skills enhance the agent's core functionalities by offering specialized knowledge and workflows. Each skill is defined by a dedicated directory containing a SKILL.md file, which includes YAML frontmatter for metadata (such as name and description) and Markdown instructions for the agent. This format, adapted from OpenClaw's skill system, ensures consistency and facilitates skill management. Examples of these skills include github for interacting with GitHub, summarize for content summarization, tmux for remote tmux session control, weather for retrieving weather information, and cron for scheduling tasks. A meta-skill, skill-creator, also exists to guide the creation and updating of new skills. For further details on the structure and management of skills, see Skill Definition and Management.
The foundational components for agent tools are defined in nanobot/agent/tools, where the Tool abstract base class establishes a consistent interface for all tools. A ToolRegistry dynamically manages the registration, retrieval, and execution of these tools. This registry allows agents to discover and utilize functionalities such as ExecTool for secure shell command execution, ReadFileTool, WriteFileTool, EditFileTool, and ListDirTool for file system manipulation, WebSearchTool and WebFetchTool for web interaction, MessageTool for sending messages, CronTool for scheduling tasks via the Cron Service for Scheduled Tasks, and SpawnTool for creating subagents. These tools enable the nanobot to interact with its environment and delegate complex operations. For more information on the core tool architecture, see Core Tool Registry and Abstractions and Built-in Agent Tools.
Specific skills like the github skill facilitate interaction with GitHub repositories using the gh command-line interface, allowing agents to manage pull requests, check CI status, view workflow runs, and perform advanced API queries with structured output. The cron skill allows agents to schedule reminders and recurring tasks, which can either deliver direct user messages or trigger agent-executed tasks based on flexible time expressions. Guidelines for creating and updating skills, including their anatomy, bundled resources, and the progressive disclosure design principle for efficient context management, are provided through the skill-creator skill. See GitHub Interaction Skill and Skill Creation and Anatomy for comprehensive details.
### Core Tool Registry and Abstractionslinkzoom_inThe foundational components for defining, managing, and registering agent tools are centered around the Tool abstract base class and the dynamic ToolRegistry. This structure ensures a consistent interface and discoverability for all tools available to the AI agent.
The Tool class, defined in nanobot/agent/tools/base.py, establishes a common contract that all agent tools must adhere to. It mandates properties such as name, description, and parameters, which are essential for an agent to understand a tool's purpose and how to interact with it. The parameters property specifically uses JSON Schema to provide a machine-readable definition of the tool's input requirements, enabling automated validation and integration with agent frameworks. Additionally, the execute method is an asynchronous operation where the tool's core logic resides, returning a string result. This base class also includes methods to validate input parameters against its defined schema and to convert its metadata into a format compatible with OpenAI's function calling paradigm, facilitating interaction with various AI models.
The ToolRegistry, implemented in nanobot/agent/tools/registry.py, acts as a centralized manager for Tool instances. It allows for the dynamic registration, retrieval, and unregistration of tools, providing flexibility in an agent's capabilities. This registry maintains a collection of available tools and offers methods to check for a tool's presence, retrieve its definition, and asynchronously execute a tool by its name with provided parameters. This design decouples the agent's core logic from the specifics of each tool, promoting extensibility and modularity. The __init__.py file in nanobot/agent/tools serves as an entry point, re-exporting both the Tool base class and the ToolRegistry for public use.
### Built-in Agent ToolslinkTool NamePython FileDescriptionexecshell.pyExecute shell commands and return their output, with safety guards.read_filefilesystem.pyRead the content of a specified file.write_filefilesystem.pyWrite content to a specified file, creating directories as needed.edit_filefilesystem.pyEdit a file by replacing an exact old text with new text.list_dirfilesystem.pyList the contents of a specified directory.web_searchweb.pySearch the web using the Brave Search API.web_fetchweb.pyFetch and extract readable content from a URL.messagemessage.pySend messages to users on chat channels.croncron.pySchedule, list, and remove reminders and recurring tasks.spawnspawn.pySpawn a subagent to handle a task in the background.
The nanobot framework includes a suite of pre-implemented tools that extend the AI agent's capabilities, allowing it to interact with the environment, manage information, and perform scheduled tasks. These tools are designed to be discoverable and executable by an agent, providing functionalities ranging from shell command execution and file system manipulation to web interaction, message sending, cron job scheduling, and subagent spawning. The structure and management of these tools are detailed in Core Tool Registry and Abstractions.
Shell command execution is facilitated by the ExecTool defined in nanobot/agent/tools/shell.py. This tool allows the agent to execute arbitrary shell commands, incorporating security mechanisms to guard against dangerous operations and restrict execution paths to specified directories.
For file system interactions, the framework provides a set of tools implemented in nanobot/agent/tools/filesystem.py. These include ReadFileTool for reading file contents, WriteFileTool for creating or overwriting files, EditFileTool for modifying specific text within files, and ListDirTool for listing directory contents. Each of these tools incorporates path resolution and security checks to ensure operations are confined to an allowed_dir, preventing unauthorized access.
Web interaction capabilities are provided by tools in nanobot/agent/tools/web.py. The WebSearchTool uses the Brave Search API to perform web queries and retrieve structured search results. The WebFetchTool is designed to fetch content from URLs, intelligently handling various content types (JSON, HTML) and extracting readable text, with the ability to convert HTML to Markdown.
Agents can send messages to users or other channels through the MessageTool, implemented in nanobot/agent/tools/message.py. This tool constructs and dispatches outbound messages using a configurable callback mechanism, allowing it to integrate with various messaging platforms.
The CronTool in nanobot/agent/tools/cron.py enables the agent to interact with a cron scheduling service. It allows for adding, listing, and removing scheduled tasks and reminders, with messages delivered to the appropriate conversation context. For a deeper understanding of the CronService, refer to Cron Service for Scheduled Tasks.
Finally, the SpawnTool in nanobot/agent/tools/spawn.py facilitates the creation of background subagents. This allows a primary agent to offload complex or time-consuming tasks for asynchronous execution, with subagents configured to report their results back to the originating context upon completion.
### Skill Definition and Managementlinkzoom_inThe nanobot system extends its capabilities through a structured skill system, managed within the nanobot/skills directory. This system allows the AI assistant to perform specialized tasks by defining skills that encapsulate knowledge, workflows, and tools. The design principles and format for these skills are adapted from OpenClaw, ensuring a consistent and extensible architecture.
Each skill is represented by a dedicated subdirectory within nanobot/skills and is primarily defined by a SKILL.md file. This Markdown file is structured with YAML frontmatter at the beginning, which includes essential metadata such as the skill's name and description. The description is particularly important as it helps the AI agent determine when to invoke a specific skill. Following the frontmatter, the SKILL.md file contains Markdown instructions that guide the agent on how to use the skill once it has been triggered.
Skills can also include optional Bundled Resources to support their operations. These resources are organized into subdirectories within the skill's directory:

scripts/: Contains executable code, typically in Python or Bash, used for deterministic or repetitive tasks. Utilizing scripts helps in optimizing token usage by avoiding the need to load extensive code into the agent's context.
references/: Stores documentation or reference materials (e.g., API documentation, finance-related guides). These are loaded into the agent's context only when specifically needed, preventing unnecessary context bloat.
assets/: Holds files that are not meant for context loading but might be used in the agent's output, such as images or templates.

This modular structure supports a "Progressive Disclosure Design Principle," where information is revealed to the agent in layers to manage context efficiently. Core metadata (name and description) is always available. The main SKILL.md body is loaded when the skill is triggered, and Bundled Resources are loaded only as needed during skill execution.
The nanobot system includes several built-in skills, such as github for interacting with GitHub, weather for retrieving weather information, summarize for content summarization, and tmux for remote tmux session control. A meta-skill, skill-creator, is also provided to guide the creation and updating of new skills. For more detailed information on specific skill implementations, refer to Built-in Agent Tools. The process of creating and packaging new skills is further detailed in Skill Creation and Anatomy.
### Skill Creation and Anatomylinkzoom_inThis section provides a guide for creating and updating agent skills, which extend the AI assistant's capabilities with specialized knowledge, workflows, and tools. Skills are designed as modular, self-contained packages.
The fundamental structure, or Anatomy of a Skill, involves a required Markdown file located at nanobot/skills/skill-creator/SKILL.md and optional bundled resources. The SKILL.md file contains YAML Frontmatter with name and description fields. The description is critical as it informs the agent when to utilize a skill. The Body of SKILL.md provides instructions and guidance, which are loaded only after the skill is triggered.
Optional Bundled Resources enhance skills by providing:

scripts/: For executable code (e.g., Python, Bash) that performs deterministic or repetitive tasks, improving token efficiency.
references/: For documentation and reference material (e.g., finance.md, api_docs.md), loaded into context only when needed to prevent context bloat.
assets/: For files not intended for context loading but used in the agent's output (e.g., logo.png, slides.pptx).

A key principle in skill design is the Progressive Disclosure Design Principle, which employs a three-level loading system for efficient context management:

Metadata: The skill's name and description are always in context.
SKILL.md Body: The content of SKILL.md is loaded when the skill is triggered.
Bundled Resources: These are loaded on demand by the agent as necessary.

This approach ensures that only relevant information is presented to the agent at any given time, optimizing token usage. Various Progressive Disclosure Patterns are outlined to help organize content effectively, keeping SKILL.md concise and deferring detailed information to reference files.
The Skill Creation Process involves several steps, supported by utility scripts:

Understand the skill: Clarify its usage patterns with concrete examples.
Plan reusable content: Identify necessary scripts/, references/, and assets/.
Initialize the Skill: Use the init_skill.py script to generate a template skill directory.
Edit the Skill: Implement reusable resources and update SKILL.md according to Frontmatter and Body guidelines.
Package a Skill: Use the package_skill.py script to validate and package the skill into a .skill file, which is a zip archive with a .skill extension.
Iterate: Refine the skill based on real-world usage and feedback.

The system also provides Skill Naming conventions, recommending lowercase, digits, hyphens, short verb-led phrases, and names under 64 characters for consistency. For further details on existing skills, refer to Built-in Agent Tools and Skill Definition and Management.
### GitHub Interaction Skilllink bash content_copyCopy```# Get PRs with their number and title, formatted as "NUMBER: TITLE"gh pr list \  --repo owner/repo \  --json number,title \  --jq 'map("\(.number): \(.title)") | .[]'```The github skill provides an interface for interacting with GitHub repositories through the gh command-line interface (CLI). This skill acts as a wrapper, leveraging the capabilities of the gh tool rather than re-implementing GitHub API interactions. Its primary function is to enable the nanobot AI assistant to manage pull requests, monitor continuous integration (CI) statuses, view workflow runs, and execute advanced GitHub API queries.
The skill supports common GitHub operations, such as checking the CI status of pull requests using gh pr checks and listing or viewing detailed information about GitHub Actions workflow runs with gh run list and gh run view. For more specialized data retrieval, the gh api command allows direct interaction with the GitHub REST API. This is particularly useful for querying information not readily available through standard gh subcommands.
A key aspect of this skill's design is its emphasis on structured output and filtering. It utilizes the --json flag, which is available across many gh commands, to produce machine-readable JSON output. This output can then be processed and transformed using the --jq flag, which accepts jq expressions for precise data extraction and formatting. The SKILL.md file in nanobot/skills/github/SKILL.md documents these functionalities, including installation instructions for the gh binary and metadata relevant to the nanobot system. This approach allows the nanobot to perform complex GitHub interactions and integrate the results into its operational workflow.
### Summarization Skilllink bash content_copyCopy```# Summarize a URL with a specific length and language modelsummarize "https://example.com/article-to-summarize" --length medium --model google/gemini-3-flash-preview```The summarize skill, located in nanobot/skills/summarize, provides capabilities for content summarization and extraction. This skill functions as a command-line interface (CLI) tool designed to process information from various sources, including URLs, local files (such as PDFs), and YouTube videos. Beyond generating summaries, it can also extract transcripts from YouTube links.
Users can specify the desired summary length using flags like --length (e.g., short, medium, long) and select a language model for summarization via the --model flag. The system integrates with various large language models (LLMs) from providers like OpenAI, Anthropic, xAI, and Google, requiring the appropriate API keys for authentication.
To handle challenges like blocked websites or as a fallback for YouTube content, the summarize skill incorporates mechanisms such as firecrawl and Apify. firecrawl (activated with --firecrawl auto|off|always) is used for accessing content on otherwise inaccessible sites, requiring a FIRECRAWL_API_KEY. Similarly, Apify (--youtube auto) serves as an alternative for YouTube processing if an APIFY_API_TOKEN is configured. The skill is designed to leverage external summarize binaries, which are expected to be pre-installed on the system, and allows for configuration through a ~/.summarize/config.json file to set a default model.
### Tmux Session Management Skilllink bash content_copyCopy```#!/usr/bin/env bash# /hkuds/nanobot/nanobot/skills/tmux/scripts/wait-for-text.sh# Poll a tmux pane for text and exit when found.# This script waits for the string "ready" in the current pane of the current session.# It will check every 0.5 seconds and time out after 30 seconds../wait-for-text.sh \  --target "$(tmux display-message -p '#S:#W.#P')" \  --pattern "ready" \  --fixed \  --timeout 30 \  --interval 0.5# Example: Wait for a specific message in a named pane "my_session:my_window.0"# This example uses a regular expression to match "Service started successfully"# You can adjust --lines to inspect more or less history.# ./wait-for-text.sh \#   --target "my_session:my_window.0" \#   --pattern "Service started successfully" \#   --timeout 60 \#   --lines 500```The tmux skill provides capabilities for the remote control and orchestration of tmux sessions, enabling interaction with interactive command-line interfaces (CLIs). This is distinct from background execution for non-interactive tasks, offering a mechanism for scenarios such as orchestrating multiple agents in parallel. The skill is designed for darwin and linux operating systems.
Key functionalities include managing tmux sessions (creating, listing, attaching to, and terminating sessions) and interacting with panes (sending input and capturing output). It supports distinguishing between literal key sends and control key presses for precise input. To monitor output, the skill captures pane history and utilizes helper scripts, such as nanobot/skills/tmux/scripts/wait-for-text.sh, to await specific text patterns or prompts. This allows for the orchestration of parallel tasks, where separate tmux sessions can host individual coding agents that send commands and poll for completion by checking for shell prompts.
To prevent conflicts and enable independent operation, the tmux skill emphasizes the use of isolated socket files for tmux instances. This behavior is configurable via the NANOBOT_TMUX_SOCKET_DIR environment variable. Input to panes prioritizes literal sends, and it recommends setting PYTHON_BASIC_REPL=1 for Python REPLs to ensure correct send-keys functionality.
Utility scripts supporting this skill are located in nanobot/skills/tmux/scripts. One such script, nanobot/skills/tmux/scripts/find-sessions.sh, helps list tmux sessions, offering filtering options by socket or session name and the ability to scan multiple sockets. Another critical script, nanobot/skills/tmux/scripts/wait-for-text.sh, polls a tmux pane for a specified text pattern, exiting successfully upon finding the pattern or with an error if a timeout occurs. This polling mechanism includes configurable intervals and line history inspection, making it suitable for automating interactions that depend on dynamic terminal output.
### Weather Information Skilllinkzoom_inThe weather skill provides current weather conditions and forecasts to the nanobot AI assistant by leveraging two distinct, free-to-use services: wttr.in and Open-Meteo. All interactions with these services are managed via the curl command-line tool, a dependency for this skill.
wttr.in serves as the primary source for human-readable weather information. It supports a variety of output formats, allowing for detailed displays of conditions, temperature, humidity, wind, location, and moon phases through specific format codes. It can also handle URL-encoded locations, airport codes, and unit selections (metric or USCS), and even generate images of forecasts.
For programmatic access to weather data, Open-Meteo functions as a fallback. This service provides weather information in JSON format, requiring latitude and longitude coordinates for queries. It delivers current data such as temperature, wind speed, and a weather code. The typical workflow involves first determining the coordinates for a desired location before querying the API.
The documentation for this skill is located at nanobot/skills/weather/SKILL.md. The skill's directory is nanobot/skills/weather.
## Large Language Model (LLM) and Transcription Providerslinkzoom_inThe nanobot system integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) and transcription services through a defined abstraction layer, allowing for flexible integration of various providers. This abstraction ensures consistent interaction regardless of the underlying LLM or transcription service. The core components are located in the nanobot/providers directory.
The system defines standard interfaces for both LLM interaction and audio transcription. For LLMs, it uses an abstract base class that outlines methods for chat completions and model identification. This approach allows different LLM providers to be swapped without changing the core application logic. Responses from LLMs are standardized using a LLMResponse data structure, which includes content, potential tool calls, and usage information. This design facilitates consistent processing of LLM outputs across the system.
A concrete implementation for LLM interaction is provided by the LiteLLMProvider, which leverages the litellm library. This integration allows the system to access various LLM services, including OpenRouter, Anthropic, and OpenAI, through a unified interface. The LiteLLMProvider manages API keys, handles model name normalization for different providers, and parses responses into the system's standard LLMResponse format, including the interpretation of tool calls. For further details on the LLM provider's internal structure and data types, refer to LLM Provider Abstraction and Data Structures. More specific information about the LiteLLM integration can be found in LiteLLM Integration for LLM Services.
For audio transcription, the nanobot system includes the GroqTranscriptionProvider, detailed in nanobot/providers/transcription.py. This provider uses Groq's Whisper API to transcribe audio files. It manages API key configuration, handles file uploads, and processes the API response to extract the transcribed text. This enables the system to convert spoken input into text for further processing by the AI agent. More information is available in Groq for Audio Transcription.
### LLM Provider Abstraction and Data Structureslinkzoom_inThe nanobot system provides a flexible framework for integrating various Large Language Model (LLM) providers through an abstract interface defined in nanobot/providers/base.py. This abstraction allows for the interchangeability of LLM services, ensuring that the core application logic remains independent of specific LLM APIs.
Central to this framework is the LLMProvider abstract base class, which establishes a contract that all concrete LLM implementations must adhere to. This contract includes methods for sending chat completion requests and retrieving default model names, standardizing how the nanobot interacts with different LLMs.
Communication with LLMs and the interpretation of their responses are managed through two key data structures: ToolCallRequest and LLMResponse. The ToolCallRequest dataclass represents a structured request from an LLM to invoke an external tool, containing the tool's identifier, name, and necessary arguments. This enables the LLM to extend its capabilities by interacting with the nanobot's toolset. The LLMResponse dataclass encapsulates the output received from an LLM, providing a consistent format that includes the LLM's natural language content, any requested tool calls, the reason for the response's completion, and usage statistics. This standardized response format simplifies parsing and processing across different LLM providers, ensuring a unified handling of AI outputs within the nanobot system. For a concrete implementation leveraging litellm, see LiteLLM Integration for LLM Services.
### LiteLLM Integration for LLM Serviceslinkzoom_inThe LiteLLMProvider class within nanobot/providers/litellm_provider.py serves as a unified interface for interacting with a diverse range of Large Language Models (LLMs) via the litellm library. This implementation abstracts the complexities of individual LLM APIs, allowing the nanobot system to use a single mechanism for sending chat completion requests.
The provider manages API keys and base URLs, configuring litellm to correctly route requests to various services such as OpenRouter, Anthropic, OpenAI, and Groq. It normalizes model names by prefixing them (e.g., openrouter/, zai/) to align with litellm's internal routing requirements, ensuring that the correct model is addressed regardless of the underlying service.
The chat method handles asynchronous requests to the LLM, passing messages, tool definitions, and generation parameters like max_tokens and temperature. After receiving a response from litellm, the _parse_response method processes the raw output. This parsing converts litellm's specific response format into a standardized LLMResponse data structure, extracting relevant information such as the generated content, any tool_calls, the finish_reason, and usage statistics. This includes robust parsing of tool call arguments, which may be JSON strings. The LiteLLMProvider also incorporates error handling to manage potential issues during API calls, returning an LLMResponse with an error message to prevent system interruptions. For the foundational interfaces and data structures used, refer to LLM Provider Abstraction and Data Structures.
### Groq for Audio Transcriptionlinkzoom_inThe GroqTranscriptionProvider, defined in nanobot/providers/transcription.py, is responsible for transcribing audio files into text using Groq's Whisper API. This provider offers an efficient way to convert spoken language into a written format, which can then be processed by other components of the nanobot system.
The provider's initialization manages the API key, which can be supplied directly or via the GROQ_API_KEY environment variable. This setup ensures secure access to the Groq service.
The core functionality is provided by the asynchronous transcribe method. This method takes an audio file's path, verifies its existence, and then sends it to Groq's whisper-large-v3 model. The transcription process involves an httpx.AsyncClient to perform an asynchronous POST request, ensuring that the nanobot's operations remain non-blocking while waiting for the transcription service. Authentication is handled using the provided API key as a Bearer token. Upon receiving a response, the transcribe method parses the JSON output to extract the transcribed text. Robust error handling is included to manage potential issues during the API call, ensuring that transcription failures are gracefully managed. This design allows for seamless integration of voice input into the nanobot's conversational and operational flows. For a broader understanding of how various providers are integrated, refer to LLM Provider Abstraction and Data Structures.
## Session and Workspace Managementlinkzoom_inThe nanobot AI assistant manages conversational sessions and its operational workspace through a combination of in-memory caching and persistent storage mechanisms. This system ensures that interactions are maintained across time and that the AI's operational parameters, personality, and long-term knowledge are consistently available.
Conversational sessions are managed by a SessionManager which handles the creation, retrieval, and persistence of Session objects. Each Session object (nanobot/session/manager.py) stores the conversation history, including messages, timestamps, and metadata, using a JSONL format for disk persistence. The SessionManager utilizes an in-memory cache to efficiently access active sessions, reducing the need for repeated disk I/O. When a session is requested, the manager first checks its cache, then attempts to load it from a dedicated sessions directory (Path.home() / ".nanobot" / "sessions"). New sessions are created if one isn't found, ensuring continuous conversational context. This design allows for the management of multiple concurrent conversations while preserving their state. See Conversational Session Management and Persistence for more details.
The AI assistant's operational workspace (workspace) defines its core behavior and knowledge base. This includes a SOUL.md file (workspace/SOUL.md) which outlines the assistant's personality, values, and communication style, guiding its interactions. Operational guidelines are detailed in AGENTS.md (workspace/AGENTS.md), covering how the AI should approach tasks, utilize its tools, manage memory, and handle scheduled reminders. The TOOLS.md file (workspace/TOOLS.md) lists the various functionalities available to the AI, ranging from file system operations and shell command execution to web access and communication.
Periodic tasks for the agent are configured via HEARTBEAT.md (workspace/HEARTBEAT.md), which is checked at regular intervals to trigger specific actions. User-specific information and preferences, such as name, timezone, communication style, and technical level, are stored in USER.md (workspace/USER.md), allowing for personalized interactions. Long-term memory is maintained in the memory directory (workspace/memory), with MEMORY.md (workspace/memory/MEMORY.md) serving as an automatically updated repository for important facts, project context, and general notes that persist across sessions. This structured workspace allows the nanobot to maintain a consistent identity, perform periodic duties, and leverage cumulative knowledge over time. See AI Assistant Operational Workspace Configuration and Long-Term Memory Storage and Recall for more information.
### Conversational Session Management and Persistencelinkzoom_inConversational sessions in the nanobot system are managed to ensure persistent state and history across interactions. The core components for this are the Session dataclass and the SessionManager class, both exposed via nanobot/session/__init__.py.
The Session dataclass stores essential information for a conversation, including a unique key (typically identifying the channel and chat), a list of messages exchanged during the session, and timestamps for creation and last update. It also includes a metadata dictionary for custom session-specific data. Messages added to a session are appended with their role, content, and a timestamp. The session can also provide a formatted history of recent messages suitable for Large Language Models (LLMs), containing only the role and content.
The SessionManager is responsible for the lifecycle and persistence of these Session objects. It maintains an in-memory cache for active sessions to ensure efficient access. When a session is requested, the manager first checks its cache. If the session is not found in memory, it attempts to load it from a JSONL file stored on disk. If still not found, a new Session is created. Sessions are persisted by writing their metadata and messages as JSONL files to a dedicated sessions directory within the user's home workspace. This mechanism allows sessions to be saved, loaded, and deleted. The manager can also list summaries of all stored sessions without loading their full message histories, which is useful for administrative tasks. The path to a session's JSONL file is derived from its unique key, which is sanitized for filesystem compatibility.
### AI Assistant Operational Workspace Configurationlinkzoom_inThe AI assistant's operational workspace is primarily configured within the workspace directory, which centralizes definitions for its personality, available tools, and memory management strategies. This comprehensive setup allows for the customization and consistent operation of the nanobot.
The assistant's behavioral traits and communication style are defined in workspace/SOUL.md. This file establishes its personality, values (e.g., accuracy, user privacy), and communication guidelines (e.g., clarity, directness), ensuring a consistent interaction experience.
Available functionalities, or tools, are documented in workspace/TOOLS.md. This includes capabilities for file system interaction (read_file, write_file), shell command execution (exec), web access (web_search, web_fetch), sending messages (message), and spawning subagents for complex tasks (spawn). It also outlines how to manage scheduled reminders via nanobot cron add commands and periodic tasks by modifying workspace/HEARTBEAT.md.
Operational guidelines and memory management strategies are detailed in workspace/AGENTS.md. This document instructs the AI on how to explain its actions, clarify ambiguous requests, and utilize its tools effectively. It differentiates between daily notes stored in the workspace/memory directory and long-term information stored in workspace/memory/MEMORY.md. The guidelines also cover the handling of scheduled reminders, emphasizing the use of nanobot cron add commands rather than simply writing them to memory files. Periodic tasks are managed through workspace/HEARTBEAT.md.
Periodic task scheduling is specifically managed through workspace/HEARTBEAT.md. This file contains a list of tasks that the nanobot agent checks and executes every 30 minutes, distinguishing between active and completed tasks. Further details on how the service responsible for this operates can be found in Heartbeat Service for Periodic Wake-ups.
User profiles and preferences are configured in workspace/USER.md. This file enables personalization by defining user details such as name, timezone, language, communication style, response length, and technical level. It also includes sections for work context, topics of interest, and special instructions for the AI.
Long-term memory is maintained within the workspace/memory directory, with workspace/memory/MEMORY.md serving as the primary file for persistent storage. This ensures that crucial information, such as user details, preferences, project context, and important notes, is retained across sessions for recall.
### Long-Term Memory Storage and Recalllinkzoom_inThe memory directory, located at workspace/memory, serves as the persistent long-term storage for the nanobot system. This directory is crucial for retaining important data across user sessions, allowing the AI assistant to remember past interactions and information. It organizes persistent information into categories such as user details, preferences, project context, and general notes. The file workspace/memory/MEMORY.md is automatically updated by nanobot to store new information for long-term recall, ensuring that relevant data is always available to the AI agent. This mechanism allows the nanobot to build a continuous understanding of its operational environment and user needs.
## Command-Line Interface (CLI)linkzoom_inThe command-line interface (CLI) for the nanobot personal AI assistant provides a direct means for users to configure the system, manage the operational workspace, interact with AI agents, and control scheduled tasks and communication channels. The core CLI application, implemented in nanobot/cli/commands.py, utilizes typer for structuring commands and subcommands, and rich.console for styled output.
The CLI offers an onboard command for initial setup, which initializes the nanobot environment by creating the user's workspace and populating it with essential configuration templates such as AGENTS.md, SOUL.md, USER.md, and memory/MEMORY.md. This ensures the assistant has a foundational structure for defining its personality, tools, and operational guidelines.
For running the core AI services, the gateway command orchestrates the startup and graceful shutdown of various components. These include the MessageBus for inter-service communication, an LiteLLMProvider for interacting with Large Language Models (LLMs), a CronService for managing scheduled tasks, the central AgentLoop for AI processing, a HeartbeatService for periodic wake-up calls, and a ChannelManager for external communication. This command effectively launches the nanobot's operational backbone.
Direct interaction with the AI agent is facilitated by the agent command, allowing users to send single messages or engage in interactive conversations. This command sets up the necessary MessageBus, LiteLLMProvider, and AgentLoop to process user input and generate AI responses.
Channel management is handled by the channels_app subcommand group, which includes channels_status to display the status of configured communication channels and channels_login to initiate login processes for external platforms, often involving a JavaScript-based bridge application for platforms like WhatsApp Web. See Channel Plugin Architecture and WhatsApp Web Bridge Implementation for more details.
The cron_app subcommand group provides comprehensive management for scheduled tasks, allowing users to cron_list existing jobs, cron_add new ones with specific schedules and delivery options, cron_remove jobs, cron_enable jobs, and cron_run them manually. This integrates with the CronService described in Cron Service for Scheduled Tasks.
Finally, the status command offers an overview of the nanobot's setup, verifying configuration and workspace paths and indicating the presence of configured AI models and API keys for various LLM providers.
### Initial Setup and Onboardinglinkzoom_inThe onboard command initializes the nanobot environment by creating the user's workspace and generating essential configuration files. This process involves using the get_config_path and save_config utilities from nanobot.config.loader to manage a Config object, which defines application settings. The user's workspace is established via get_workspace_path from nanobot.utils.helpers. This workspace is then populated with initial templates, including AGENTS.md, SOUL.md, USER.md, and memory/MEMORY.md, which set up initial definitions for the agent's behavior, personality, user profiles, and long-term memory respectively. This setup ensures that the AI assistant has a foundational structure and initial data for its operations.
### Gateway and Core Service Orchestrationlinkzoom_inThe gateway command serves as the orchestrator for the nanobot's core services, managing their startup and graceful shutdown. This command is accessible via the command-line interface as described in Command-Line Interface (CLI). When invoked, it loads the system configuration and initializes key components that enable the nanobot's operations.
Central to this orchestration is the MessageBus, which facilitates asynchronous communication between different parts of the system. Concurrently, the LiteLLMProvider is set up to interact with various Large Language Models, handling API key management and model normalization as detailed in LiteLLM Integration for LLM Services.
Scheduled tasks are managed by the CronService, which is configured with a persistent store for cron jobs and an asynchronous callback to integrate with the agent's processing. The AgentLoop acts as the primary AI processing unit, responsible for executing agent logic, processing messages, and utilizing tools. This loop is configured with the MessageBus, LiteLLMProvider, and other operational parameters such as the workspace, model, and execution configuration, as further elaborated in AI Agent Core Architecture.
Additionally, the HeartbeatService provides periodic wake-up calls, triggering the agent at regular intervals. External communication channels, such as those discussed in Channel Plugin Architecture, are managed by the ChannelManager.
The entire orchestration, including the startup and shutdown of these components, is handled asynchronously within the run function, ensuring smooth operation and graceful termination. The configuration details for these services are loaded from the system's Config object, as explained in Configuration Management.
### Direct Agent Interactionlinkzoom_inThe agent command in the command-line interface facilitates direct interaction with the AI agent. Users can send a single message to the agent or engage in an interactive conversational mode. This command sets up the necessary components for the agent to process messages, including the MessageBus for asynchronous communication, the LiteLLMProvider for interacting with Large Language Models, and the AgentLoop, which is the core processing unit of the AI. These components work together to ensure that messages are received, processed by the AI, and responses are generated and delivered back to the user. For more information on the core framework, refer to the Nanobot AI Assistant Core Framework section.
### Channel Managementlinkzoom_inThe channels_app Typer group, located in nanobot/cli/commands.py, provides command-line functionalities for managing the nanobot's integration with various communication channels. This includes subcommands for displaying the operational status of configured channels, initiating login procedures for new channels, and orchestrating external integrations.
The channels_status subcommand allows users to view the current status of channels such as WhatsApp, Discord, or Telegram, based on the nanobot's configuration. This provides an overview of which communication platforms are active and configured.
For channels requiring authentication or setup, the channels_login subcommand facilitates the login process. This command is designed to handle interactions that may involve external web-based platforms, for instance, by setting up and executing a JavaScript-based bridge application using npm. This bridge then manages the connection and authentication with the external service, typically involving steps like scanning a QR code for services like WhatsApp Web. The system ensures the necessary npm environment is present and manages the build and execution of the bridge application from its source in bridge/src.
Through these commands, the CLI provides a streamlined way to oversee and configure the nanobot's communication pathways with various external messaging platforms.
### Cron Job Managementlinkzoom_inThe nanobot AI assistant includes a cron_app Typer group, accessible via the command-line interface, to manage scheduled tasks for the agent. This functionality allows users to define, modify, and control jobs that execute periodically or at specific times, ensuring the AI can perform routine operations or respond to events without constant manual intervention.
Users can interact with the cron service through several commands:

Listing Jobs: The cron_list command displays all currently scheduled jobs, providing details such as their schedule, status (enabled/disabled), and next anticipated run time. This allows for a quick overview of all automated tasks.
Adding Jobs: With the cron_add command, new jobs can be created. Each job requires a unique name, a message that the agent will process, and a schedule defined using flexible options. Schedules can be set to run at regular intervals (e.g., every hour), using a standard cron expression for complex timing, or at a specific future date and time. Jobs can also be configured to deliver their responses to a specified channel and recipient, ensuring the agent's output reaches the intended audience.
Removing Jobs: The cron_remove command allows for the deletion of scheduled tasks using their job ID.
Enabling/Disabling Jobs: The cron_enable command provides control over whether a scheduled job is active or inactive, without fully deleting its configuration.
Manually Running Jobs: For immediate execution or testing, the cron_run command allows users to manually trigger a scheduled job by its ID, with an option to force execution even if the job is currently disabled.

The underlying CronService, configured with a cron_store_path (obtained via get_data_dir in nanobot/cli/commands.py), handles the persistence and scheduling logic for these jobs. This service integrates with the AI agent by using an asynchronous callback (on_cron_job), allowing the agent to process the scheduled messages as if they were direct user inputs. This setup ensures that scheduled tasks are seamlessly incorporated into the agent's operational flow. For a broader understanding of how the cron service fits into the overall AI assistant core, refer to Cron Service for Scheduled Tasks.
### System Status Overviewlink bash content_copyCopy```nanobot status# Expected output:# ╭──────────────────────────────────╮# │ nanobot Status                   │# ╰──────────────────────────────────╯# Config: /Users/username/.nanobot/config.json ✓# Workspace: /Users/username/.nanobot/workspace ✓# Model: openrouter/auto# OpenRouter API: ✓ # Indicates API key is set# Anthropic API: not set# OpenAI API: not set# Gemini API: not set# vLLM/Local: not set```The status command provides a high-level overview of the nanobot's operational environment and configuration. Its primary function is to verify the correct setup of core components and display key configuration details. This command checks for the existence of the configuration file and the user's workspace, which are essential for the nanobot's operation. Additionally, it reports the currently configured AI model and indicates whether the necessary API keys for various Large Language Model providers (such as OpenRouter, Anthropic, OpenAI, Gemini, and vLLM) are present. This allows for a quick assessment of the nanobot's readiness and connectivity to external AI services. The implementation of this command can be found in nanobot/cli/commands.py.
Copy codeView on GitHubToggle theme. Current: Dark

====================
Nanobot Codebase Analysis (2026-02-17)
Repository: /home/omar/cowbot/nanobot
Commit: 8053193a3649b0649831757d3d531201b770b697
====================

1) Scope and method
- Repository was cloned from: https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot
- Read in full: all Python/TypeScript/shell/build/test source files in repo
- Total source footprint read:
  - Python app code: 53 files, 9,231 lines (`nanobot/nanobot/**/*.py`)
  - TypeScript bridge: 4 files (`bridge/src/*.ts`, `types.d.ts`)
  - Tests: 5 Python tests + 1 shell test
  - Build/config scripts: Dockerfile, pyproject.toml, package.json, tsconfig.json, core_agent_lines.sh
  - Runtime behavior files: workspace/*.md + skills/SKILL.md

2) High-level architecture
- Pattern: Event-driven assistant framework with decoupled channel adapters and core agent loop.
- Main execution pipeline:
  1. Channel receives inbound message (Telegram/Slack/etc.)
  2. Channel publishes `InboundMessage` into `MessageBus`
  3. `AgentLoop` consumes inbound, reconstructs session context
  4. Context includes bootstrap files + long-term memory + skill metadata
  5. Provider is called (LiteLLM or OpenAI Codex)
  6. If tool calls returned: execute tool(s), append tool results, iterate
  7. Final response is persisted into session JSONL
  8. `OutboundMessage` is routed back by `ChannelManager`
- Architectural center of gravity:
  - `nanobot/agent/loop.py` (runtime orchestrator)
  - `nanobot/channels/*` (integration edge)
  - `nanobot/providers/*` (LLM adaptation)

3) Core modules analysis

3.1 Agent runtime (`nanobot/agent`)
- `loop.py`:
  - Strong: clean, deterministic tool loop with max iteration bound.
  - Strong: integrates cron, heartbeat, session persistence, subagents, MCP.
  - Behavior detail: after each tool round, injects reflective user message "Reflect on the results..." to encourage chain continuation.
  - Slash commands implemented in core: `/new`, `/help`.
- `context.py`:
  - Builds a rich system prompt including identity, current time/runtime/workspace, memory, bootstrap markdown, and skill summary.
  - Supports multimodal user input by converting local images to data URLs.
- `skills.py`:
  - Progressive-disclosure skill model is good for context efficiency.
  - Reads workspace skills first, then builtin fallback.
  - Performs dependency gating (`bins`, env vars).
- `subagent.py`:
  - Provides asynchronous task offloading with isolated toolset.
  - Returns result via synthetic `system` inbound message.
  - Good decoupling: subagent cannot message users directly and cannot recursively spawn subagents.
- `memory.py`:
  - Two-layer memory design (`MEMORY.md` + `HISTORY.md`) is simple and practical.

3.2 Tooling layer (`nanobot/agent/tools`)
- Tool abstraction and registry are well-factored:
  - JSON-schema-like parameter validation
  - OpenAI function schema conversion
  - Unified execution error handling
- Built-in tools cover complete baseline capabilities:
  - filesystem, shell, web search/fetch, message, spawn, cron, MCP wrappers
- Security intent exists (deny patterns, URL validation, workspace restriction), but there are important hardening gaps (see findings).

3.3 Providers (`nanobot/providers`)
- `registry.py` is a strong design choice:
  - Single source of truth for provider matching, env mapping, prefixes, gateway behavior.
  - Avoids brittle provider if/else chains.
- `litellm_provider.py`:
  - Good: model normalization, provider-specific overrides, gateway detection.
  - Good: resilience via graceful error wrapping.
- `openai_codex_provider.py`:
  - Custom SSE responses adapter with tool-call reconstruction.
  - Good mapping from internal message schema -> Codex Responses schema.

3.4 Messaging/session/infra
- `bus/queue.py`: minimal async queue bus; simple and understandable.
- `session/manager.py`: JSONL append-style persistence, metadata line, cache.
- `cron/service.py`: robust scheduling model (`at`, `every`, `cron`) with persistence and on_job callback.
- `heartbeat/service.py`: clean periodic wake-up semantics with actionable-content filter.

3.5 Channels (`nanobot/channels`)
- Channel plugin architecture is clean (`BaseChannel` + `ChannelManager`).
- Implemented adapters: Telegram, WhatsApp, Discord, Feishu, Mochat, DingTalk, Slack, Email, QQ.
- Most channels correctly:
  - Normalize platform events into `InboundMessage`
  - Keep per-channel metadata for thread/reply context
  - Implement platform-specific auth/session lifecycle
- `mochat.py` is the most complex file (Socket.IO + polling fallback + cursor persistence + delayed group reply logic).

3.6 CLI (`nanobot/cli/commands.py`)
- Broad operational coverage: onboard, interactive agent, gateway, channels status/login, cron CRUD, provider OAuth login.
- Interactive UX is good (prompt-toolkit history, tty flushing, graceful shutdown).

3.7 Node bridge (`bridge/src`)
- Localhost-only WS bridge for WhatsApp via Baileys.
- Optional token handshake for Python bridge client.
- Handles QR auth, reconnect, inbound/outbound relay.

4) Security and reliability findings (prioritized)

[Critical]
1. Workspace path restriction bypass via prefix string check.
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/agent/tools/filesystem.py:12`
- Problem: uses `str(resolved).startswith(str(allowed_dir.resolve()))`.
- Impact: `/allowed` check can be bypassed by sibling paths like `/allowed_evil/...`.
- Fix: replace with `resolved.is_relative_to(allowed_dir.resolve())` (Py3.11) or explicit parents check.

2. TLS verification is explicitly disabled on Codex fallback.
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/providers/openai_codex_provider.py:65`
- Problem: on cert failure, retries with `verify=False`.
- Impact: MITM risk and credential exposure in hostile network.
- Fix: never downgrade TLS verification automatically; surface explicit error and require opt-in override.

[High]
3. Session key roundtrip is lossy/collision-prone.
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/session/manager.py:69`
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/session/manager.py:171`
- Problem: key saved via `:` -> `_`, then listed via `_` -> `:`; underscores in real IDs break roundtrip.
- Impact: wrong session identifiers, ambiguous listing, potential collisions.
- Fix: encode keys reversibly (e.g., URL-safe base64) and decode symmetrically.

4. `SessionManager` ignores provided workspace path for storage location.
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/session/manager.py:62`
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/session/manager.py:64`
- Problem: always uses `~/.nanobot/sessions` regardless of workspace argument.
- Impact: weaker workspace isolation, surprising behavior in multi-workspace setups.
- Fix: derive sessions path from workspace (or make explicit config path).

[Medium]
5. Memory consolidation can run concurrently without per-session lock.
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/agent/loop.py:289`
- Problem: background `create_task(self._consolidate_memory(session))` may overlap under rapid inbound traffic.
- Impact: duplicate history summaries or inconsistent consolidation index updates.
- Fix: lock by session key or coalesce pending consolidation jobs.

6. Package version mismatch between runtime and packaging metadata.
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/__init__.py:5` (`0.1.0`)
- File: `nanobot/pyproject.toml:3` (`0.1.3.post7`)
- Impact: confusing diagnostics/version reporting.
- Fix: single source of truth (set from package metadata at build/runtime).

7. Shell guard remains best-effort and regex-based.
- File: `nanobot/nanobot/agent/tools/shell.py:111`
- Impact: sophisticated command obfuscation may bypass regex policy.
- Fix: structured command parsing + optional strict allowlist mode for production.

5) Test landscape
- Present tests:
  - CLI input behavior
  - onboarding command flow
  - tool schema validation
  - email channel parsing/sending
  - session consolidation slice semantics
- Gap areas (not covered by tests in repo):
  - Agent end-to-end tool loop
  - Provider registry matching matrix
  - Most channels (Telegram/Slack/Discord/Feishu/Mochat/DingTalk/QQ/WhatsApp)
  - MCP integration path
  - Security invariants for file/tool sandboxes

6) Notable strengths
- Very good modular decomposition for a compact codebase.
- Provider registry is exceptionally clean for extension.
- Channel plugin model is practical and easy to add adapters to.
- Cron + heartbeat + subagent support gives strong autonomous-agent capability.
- Skill system is simple but effective; progressive loading prevents prompt bloat.

7) Refactoring opportunities
- Split `channels/mochat.py` into smaller components (socket transport, polling transport, dedup, buffering, persistence).
- Extract security policy checks into a unified guard module used by filesystem and shell tools.
- Add correlation IDs/tracing context from inbound -> tool calls -> outbound.
- Add explicit per-session async lock manager in AgentLoop.

8) Recommended improvement sequence
1. Fix filesystem sandbox check (`startswith` -> real path containment check).
2. Remove insecure TLS fallback in Codex provider.
3. Make session key encoding reversible and collision-safe.
4. Respect workspace for session storage or expose explicit session path config.
5. Add e2e tests for: one channel + one provider + one tool loop path.
6. Add security regression tests for path traversal and command guard edge cases.

9) Bottom line
- Nanobot is a compact, extensible personal-agent framework with clear architecture and strong practical features.
- Main technical debt is concentrated in security hardening of tool boundaries and in a few persistence edge cases.
- After the top 4 fixes above, the project quality would materially improve for production and multi-tenant reliability.
